README.md, before:

# IntegratorXX

## Synopsis

IntegratorXX is a modern C++ library for the generation of atomic and molecular
grids for quantum chemistry calculations. Among the most important applications
of these grids is the evaluation of exchange--correlation (XC) related quantities
(energies, potentials, etc) required for density functional theory calculations.

IntegratorXX provides a uniform interface for the generation of primitive,
radial and solid angle quadratures, as well as there combination into spherical
grids.

## Design Goals 

* Provide stable, reusable, and reproducible implementations of the various atomic and
molecular grids commonly encountered in quantum chemistry calculations
* Develop a modern, modular, extensible C++ API to allow for the implementation
and validation new atomic and molecular quadrature schemes.
* Provide complete C and Python interfaces to allow reusing the implementation in projects written in these languages

## Dependencies

* CMake (3.17+)
* Modern C++ compiler (C++17 compliant)

## Major Contributors

* David Williams-Young - LBNL (dbwy at lbl dot gov)
* Susi Lehtola - University of Helsinki

## Implemented Quadratures

Here we list the quadratures currently implemented in IntegratorXX. Please refer to the
source for appropriate references.



### Primitive Quadratures

Primitive quadratures are those generated on a finite bound (e.g. Gauss
quadrature rules). The general software design pattern of IntegratorXX is to
build up higher-order quadrature rules (e.g. radial transformation, etc) from
these primitive quadratures.

| Quadrature Name                 | Domain    | C++ Class           |
|---------------------------------|-----------|---------------------|
| Gauss-Chebyshev (First Kind)    | $(-1,1)$  | `GaussChebyshev1`   |
| Gauss-Chebyshev (Second Kind)   | $[-1,1]$  | `GaussChebyshev2`   |
| Gauss-Chebyshev (Third Kind)    | $(0,1)$   | `GaussChebyshev3`   |
| Gauss-Legendre                  | $[-1,1]$  | `GaussLegendre`     |
| Gauss-Lobatto                   | $[-1,1]$  | `GaussLobatto`      |
| Trapezoid Rule                  | $[0,1]$   | `UniformTrapezoid`  |

### Radial Quadratures

Radial quadratures are convolutions of primitive quadrature rules with a radial
transformation scheme (mapping the natural domain of the primitive quadrature
to positive semi-indefinite). The jacobian of the transformation *is* included
in the radial weights while the radial component of the spherical volume element 
($r^2$) is *not*.

| Quadrature Name                 | Domain       | C++ Class           |
|---------------------------------|--------------|---------------------|
| Becke                           | $(0,\infty)$ | `Becke`             |
| Murray-Handy-Laming (MHL)       | $(0,\infty)$ | `MurrayHandyLaming` |
| Mura-Knowles (MK)               | $(0,\infty)$ | `MuraKnowles`       |
| Treutler-Ahlrichs (TA, M3 + M4) | $(0,\infty)$ | `TreutlerAhlrichs`  |


### Angular Quadratures

Angular quadratures integrate over $S^2$ (solid angle). These have typically been
manually constructed to integrate spherical harmonics up to a specific order, and
are thus only compatible witch *specific* grid orders (see note below).

| Quadrature Name                 | Domain  | C++ Class           |
|---------------------------------|---------|---------------------|
| Ahrens-Beylkin                  | $S^2$   | `AhrensBeylkin`     |
| Delley                          | $S^2$   | `Delley`            |
| Lebedev-Laikov                  | $S^2$   | `LebedevLaikov`     |
| Womersley                       | $S^2$   | `Womersley`         |

#### A Note on Angular Quadratures

All of the currently implemented angular quadrature schemes are only compatible
with *specific* grid orders corresponding to *specific* algebraic orders of
spherical harmonics they integrate exactly.  The construction of the angular
grids takes the number of points as argument, and will fail if the grid order
is incompatible. As these *magic numbers* are different for each of the
quadratures, we provide a set of look-up functions which can safely produce
compatible grid orders:

```
using angular_type = LebedevLaikov<double>; // FP64 LL grid, similar for other implementations
using traits = IntegratorXX::quadrature_traits<angular_type>;

auto npts  = traits::npts_by_algebraic_order(order); // Return the grid order associated with a particular algebraic order
auto order = traits::algebraic_order_by_npts(npts);  // Return the algebratic order associated with a grid order
auto next_order = traits::next_algebraic_order(order); // Return the next largest (inclusive) algebratic order compatible with `angular_type` 
```

### Radial Pruning Schemes

For the generation of spherical quadratures, IntegratorXX additionally supports
the following radial pruning schemes:

| Name      | Description                          | C++ Specifier             |
|-----------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Unpruned  | Do not perform pruning               | `PruningScheme::Unpruned` |
| Robust    | The Psi4 "robust" pruning scheme     | `PruningScheme::Robust`   |
| Treutler  | The Treutler-Ahlrichs pruning scheme | `PruntinScheme::Treutler` |



## Example Usage

Many example usages for 1-d quadratures (i.e. primitive and radial) can be
found in `test/1d_quadratures.cxx` and `test/spherical_generator.cxx`. Below is
a simple invocation example for the generation of an atomic sphere via the
runtime generator:
```
using namespace IntegratorXX;                         // Import namespace
auto rad_spec = radial_from_string("MuraKnowles");    // MK Radial scheme
auto ang_spec = angular_from_string("AhrensBeylkin"); // AH Angular scheme
size_t nrad   = 99;
size_t nang   = 372;
double rscal  = 2.0;

// Generate Grid Specification
UnprunedSphericalGridSpecification unp{
  rad_spec, nrad, rscal, ang_spec, nang
};
auto pruning_spec = create_pruned_spec(PruningScheme::Robust, unp); 

// Generate Quadrature
auto sph_quad = SphericalGridFactory::generate_grid(pruning_spec);

size_t npts = sph_quad->npts();
const auto& points  = sph_quad->points();  // std::vector<std::array<double,3>>
const auto& weights = sph_quad->weights(); // std::vector<double>

```

## Contributing and Bug Reports

We welcome any and all contributions and encourage bug reports. Please use the
[Issue](https://github.com/wavefunction91/IntegratorXX/issues) and 
[Pull Request](https://github.com/wavefunction91/IntegratorXX/pulls) features as appropriate.

# License

IntegratorXX is made freely available under the terms of the 3-Clause BSD license. See
LICENSE.txt for details.

Commit message:

Update README with header-only instructions

README.md, after:

# IntegratorXX

## Synopsis

IntegratorXX is a modern C++ library for the generation of atomic and molecular
grids for quantum chemistry calculations. Among the most important applications
of these grids is the evaluation of exchange--correlation (XC) related quantities
(energies, potentials, etc) required for density functional theory calculations.

IntegratorXX provides a uniform interface for the generation of primitive,
radial and solid angle quadratures, as well as there combination into spherical
grids.

## Design Goals 

* Provide stable, reusable, and reproducible implementations of the various atomic and
molecular grids commonly encountered in quantum chemistry calculations
* Develop a modern, modular, extensible C++ API to allow for the implementation
and validation new atomic and molecular quadrature schemes.
* Provide complete C and Python interfaces to allow reusing the implementation in projects written in these languages

## Dependencies

* CMake (3.17+)
* Modern C++ compiler (C++17 compliant)

## Major Contributors

* David Williams-Young - LBNL (dbwy at lbl dot gov)
* Susi Lehtola - University of Helsinki

## Implemented Quadratures

Here we list the quadratures currently implemented in IntegratorXX. Please refer to the
source for appropriate references.



### Primitive Quadratures

Primitive quadratures are those generated on a finite bound (e.g. Gauss
quadrature rules). The general software design pattern of IntegratorXX is to
build up higher-order quadrature rules (e.g. radial transformation, etc) from
these primitive quadratures.

| Quadrature Name                 | Domain    | C++ Class           |
|---------------------------------|-----------|---------------------|
| Gauss-Chebyshev (First Kind)    | $(-1,1)$  | `GaussChebyshev1`   |
| Gauss-Chebyshev (Second Kind)   | $[-1,1]$  | `GaussChebyshev2`   |
| Gauss-Chebyshev (Third Kind)    | $(0,1)$   | `GaussChebyshev3`   |
| Gauss-Legendre                  | $[-1,1]$  | `GaussLegendre`     |
| Gauss-Lobatto                   | $[-1,1]$  | `GaussLobatto`      |
| Trapezoid Rule                  | $[0,1]$   | `UniformTrapezoid`  |

### Radial Quadratures

Radial quadratures are convolutions of primitive quadrature rules with a radial
transformation scheme (mapping the natural domain of the primitive quadrature
to positive semi-indefinite). The jacobian of the transformation *is* included
in the radial weights while the radial component of the spherical volume element 
($r^2$) is *not*.

| Quadrature Name                 | Domain       | C++ Class           |
|---------------------------------|--------------|---------------------|
| Becke                           | $(0,\infty)$ | `Becke`             |
| Murray-Handy-Laming (MHL)       | $(0,\infty)$ | `MurrayHandyLaming` |
| Mura-Knowles (MK)               | $(0,\infty)$ | `MuraKnowles`       |
| Treutler-Ahlrichs (TA, M3 + M4) | $(0,\infty)$ | `TreutlerAhlrichs`  |


### Angular Quadratures

Angular quadratures integrate over $S^2$ (solid angle). These have typically been
manually constructed to integrate spherical harmonics up to a specific order, and
are thus only compatible witch *specific* grid orders (see note below).

| Quadrature Name                 | Domain  | C++ Class           |
|---------------------------------|---------|---------------------|
| Ahrens-Beylkin                  | $S^2$   | `AhrensBeylkin`     |
| Delley                          | $S^2$   | `Delley`            |
| Lebedev-Laikov                  | $S^2$   | `LebedevLaikov`     |
| Womersley                       | $S^2$   | `Womersley`         |

#### A Note on Angular Quadratures

All of the currently implemented angular quadrature schemes are only compatible
with *specific* grid orders corresponding to *specific* algebraic orders of
spherical harmonics they integrate exactly.  The construction of the angular
grids takes the number of points as argument, and will fail if the grid order
is incompatible. As these *magic numbers* are different for each of the
quadratures, we provide a set of look-up functions which can safely produce
compatible grid orders:

```
using angular_type = LebedevLaikov<double>; // FP64 LL grid, similar for other implementations
using traits = IntegratorXX::quadrature_traits<angular_type>;

auto npts  = traits::npts_by_algebraic_order(order); // Return the grid order associated with a particular algebraic order
auto order = traits::algebraic_order_by_npts(npts);  // Return the algebratic order associated with a grid order
auto next_order = traits::next_algebraic_order(order); // Return the next largest (inclusive) algebratic order compatible with `angular_type` 
```

### Radial Pruning Schemes

For the generation of spherical quadratures, IntegratorXX additionally supports
the following radial pruning schemes:

| Name      | Description                          | C++ Specifier             |
|-----------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Unpruned  | Do not perform pruning               | `PruningScheme::Unpruned` |
| Robust    | The Psi4 "robust" pruning scheme     | `PruningScheme::Robust`   |
| Treutler  | The Treutler-Ahlrichs pruning scheme | `PruntinScheme::Treutler` |



## Example Usage

Many example usages for 1-d quadratures (i.e. primitive and radial) can be
found in `test/1d_quadratures.cxx` and `test/spherical_generator.cxx`. Below is
a simple invocation example for the generation of an atomic sphere via the
runtime generator:
```
using namespace IntegratorXX;                         // Import namespace
auto rad_spec = radial_from_string("MuraKnowles");    // MK Radial scheme
auto ang_spec = angular_from_string("AhrensBeylkin"); // AH Angular scheme
size_t nrad   = 99;
size_t nang   = 372;
double rscal  = 2.0;

// Generate Grid Specification
UnprunedSphericalGridSpecification unp{
  rad_spec, nrad, rscal, ang_spec, nang
};
auto pruning_spec = create_pruned_spec(PruningScheme::Robust, unp); 

// Generate Quadrature
auto sph_quad = SphericalGridFactory::generate_grid(pruning_spec);

size_t npts = sph_quad->npts();
const auto& points  = sph_quad->points();  // std::vector<std::array<double,3>>
const auto& weights = sph_quad->weights(); // std::vector<double>

```

### Header-only builds

With the exception of the runtime grid generator, the entirety
of the grid specification in IntegratorXX is header-only and can operate
without pre-compiled components. By default, the runtime generator is 
pre-compiled to improve the efficiency of the compilation process and to
avoid excessive build times in complex projects with aggressive compiler
optimization. **N.B. it is highly recommend that users maintain this default
behavior to avoid excessive compilation sizes and build times**.

IntegratorXX also allows for header-only use of the runtime generator by 
setting `INTEGRATORXX_HEADER_ONLY=ON`. 
This feature also allows for circumvention of
the CMake build system by simply including the requisite implementation
header.

To use the runtime generator header-only, one needs to include 
`<integratorxx/generators/impl/impl.hpp>` **exactly once** per project,
otherwise duplicate / incompatible symbols will occur.

## Contributing and Bug Reports

We welcome any and all contributions and encourage bug reports. Please use the
[Issue](https://github.com/wavefunction91/IntegratorXX/issues) and 
[Pull Request](https://github.com/wavefunction91/IntegratorXX/pulls) features as appropriate.

# License

IntegratorXX is made freely available under the terms of the 3-Clause BSD license. See
LICENSE.txt for details.
